hi everyone my name is Dr Mark Eaton
welcome to heal
NPD a common misconception about NPD is
that people with the disorder never seek
treatment an even stranger and perhaps
more Insidious myth is that by simply
asking whether or not you have NPD
you've somehow proven that you don't
have
NPD these ideas circulate widely in
online discussions about narcissism
reinforcing harmful stereotypes and
ultimately discouraging people who
actually want help from seeking it so
today I want to break down where these
misconceptions come from why they
persist and how they distort our
understanding of
NPD much of the confusion seems to stem
from the fact that many but certainly
not all people with personality
disorders struggle with insight about
their condition personality disorders
affect multiple aspects of a person's
life from relationships to occupational
functioning to their own internal
experiences typically these patterns of
thinking and behaving are both
inflexible and maladaptive yet they may
feel entirely normal to the
individual for example someone with
paranoid personality disorder may
perceive the world in terms of safety
and danger and their relationships
through a lens of humiliation and
rejection likewise someone with NPD
might view Life as a zero sum game where
a person is either Superior or inferior
their relationships often involve around
feeling validated and admired versus
feeling devalued and ashamed and their
sense of self often fluctuates between
periods of grandiosity and periods of
worthlessness often without much
awareness that these shifts are driven
by internal processes rather than
external
events so given this it's understandable
why some people might assume that
individuals with NPD
would never recognize these patterns let
alone seek treatment for them but while
it's common for individuals with
personality disorders to lack Insight
it's by no means
Universal over the years I've worked
with many people with personality
disorders n PD included who do recognize
that their thoughts are
maladaptive but recognizing a problem
doesn't automatically mean having the
tools to fix it the reality is that
someone can be fully aware that their
patterns are unhealthy and still unable
to change them a related concept
involves ego syntonic versus ego
distonic symptoms which is an important
distinction that's often overlooked ego
syntonic symptoms feel consistent with a
person's sense of self they don't feel
like a problem a person with NPD May
recognize that they experience extreme
fluctuations in their self-esteem but
they might believe that the problem is
actually in other people for for failing
to see them correctly for not offering
enough admiration or for not treating
them with the recognition that they feel
they
deserve in contrast ego distonic
symptoms often feel alien and
distressing classic examples might
include depression and anxiety where the
person recognizes that something is
wrong inside and they seek treatment to
change it the DSM description of NPD
heavily emphasizes its ego Sy onic
aspects like grandiosity entitlement and
arrogance which has led many to assume
that NPD is entirely
ensonic but anyone familiar with the
disorder knows that's simply not true
one of the defining features of NPD is
periodic self-esteem
collapse people with NPD do not exist in
a constant state of EG syntonic
grandiosity when grandiosity fails when
when they experience rejection failure
or a significant narcissistic injury
they often collapse into ego distonic
symptoms like depression anxiety
feelings of worthlessness and
inferiority attachment anxiety substance
abuse and even suicidal
ideation it's in these states that
people with NPD are most likely to seek
therapy the problem is that clinicians
are rarely trained to recognize NPD when
someone Pres presents in an ego distonic
collapsed State instead such individuals
are often misdiagnosed with major
depression BPD or generalized anxiety
disorder which reinforces the false
narrative that narcissists never seek
therapy as a specialist working in this
area of practice I receive emails every
single day from people around the world
who recognize that something is wrong
and who want help a significant portion
of my practice I involves conducting
comprehensive personality assessments
and as I've said before most of the time
when someone contacts me suspecting that
they have NPD they're correct contrary
to popular belief people can be quite
good at recognizing their own
pathological narcissism so the idea that
merely asking if you have NPD somehow
means that you don't have NPD is an
absolute falsehood at its core I think
this particular misconception
rests on a heavily stigmatized
stereotype of NPD one that excludes the
possibility of insight or good faith
attempts at
self-improvement if we Define NPD as a
disorder in which a person is incapable
of acting in good faith incapable of
caring about others and incapable of
self-reflection then of course it
follows that such a person would never
seek treatment or be curious about their
condition this is unfortunately the
version of NPD that often dominates
online discourse according to much of
the internet narcissists are purely
manipulative completely devoid of
empathy malicious and predatory by
Nature do some individuals fit this
caricature sure but it doesn't capture
what NPD actually is the research and
clinical literature Define NPD as a
disorder of self-image and self-esteem
regulation while some people with NPD
exhibit manipulative or exploitative
behaviors those are not the core
features of the disorder the core issue
is an unstable self-image accompanied by
at least occasional feelings of
grandiosity when we move away from
stereotypes and look at what NPD
actually is it becomes clear why people
with the disorder do often seek
treatment most cases of NPD involve
periodic self-esteem collapse the rare
exception are individuals with comorbid
psychopathy or antisocial traits but for
the vast majority self-esteem collapses
are inevitable and when they happen they
often seek help the problem is that the
online space is flooded with lowquality
overgeneralized information about
NPD many of these sources are not based
on peer-reviewed Research or clinical
expertise take advantage of traumatized
individuals by providing easy but
scandalizing explanations and promote
armchair diagnosing and sensationalized
narratives if I didn't know what I know
about NPD and I relied only on what I
saw online I too might believe that
narcissists are evil have black eyes and
are incapable of good faith or growth
but this is not what the actual research
or clinical literature
says I recently attended an online
conference at Harvard where some of the
world's top researchers and clinicians
and PD presented their work none of them
was an advocate for the dsm's outdated
model multiple presenters discussed the
damaging myths and stereotypes that have
proliferated online their work largely
aligned with the material that I present
on this channel and I was reassured to
see that my content reflects the most
current understanding of this
disorder so if you're here it means that
you're interested in understanding NPD
Beyond convenient
stereotypes and if you suspect that you
may have pathological narcissism then I
encourage you to take that suspicion
seriously it does not mean that you
don't have NPD that's the bad news but
the good news is that NPD is not the
Monstrous Affliction you may have been
led to believe it's a mental disorder
like any other and it's one that can be
understood worked through and treated
okay so that's it for today weekly
insights is a series for paid
subscribers of this Channel and if you
found this helpful and you'd like to
have access to videos like this on a
weekly basis please consider becoming a
paid subscriber there's a link in the
description and until next time take
good care
[Music]